Okay, so welcome back everyone. This is our third talk on the maintainers track.
We're excited to hear about user guides by Michael Chow.
All right, thank you. Whoa, okay, so sorry, came in hot.
All right, thank you so much. Hope everybody's enjoying SciPy.
I have to admit that I'm really excited to finish this talk so that I can enjoy SciPy.
But I'm also really excited to give it.
Yeah, so I'll be talking about user guides and this idea of welcoming new users and delighting old ones.
I also have to admit I didn't love the idea of calling some people old users.
But so if you know a better word, I'm all ears.
Experienced users, we got it. So just a little bit of background on me.
My name is Michael Chow. I did a PhD in cognitive psychology.
And I work on open source data tools at PositPBC, mostly on Python tools, for example.
One tool I maintain is called Great Tables, and it's all about displaying tables for publication.
Aside from that, I have two beautiful cats, Bandit and Moondog.
And I will say one is very sassy, one is a real goober, and I'll let you decide which is which.
Yeah, so I'm really excited about user guides. I think part of it is as a cognitive psychologist,
I'm really interested in how people pick up new skills.
And as a software developer, I'm really interested in sort of my responsibility in dumping how people should use a tool
and being sure that people can use a tool to do the kind of range of things I hope that they can do with it.
I think a lot of open source developers, we build tools because we think they give people
a new or a better way to approach a problem.
And I think user guides are really the bridge from our kind of like hope inside our brain
that people can solve problems in a new way to actually putting our tools to use.
And to motivate this talk, I just want to bring up a scenario.
So I work a bit on the documentation for Plot9, which is a Python plotting library.
And suppose that you saw this graphic and you wanted to reproduce it.
I would say an interesting question is, how would you go about that?
On the one hand, you could crack open Plot9's API reference, and you might see something like this,
which is a list of a bunch of functions you could use from Plot9.
But this isn't even the whole story.
If we zoom out a little bit, there's actually more functions.
And if we just keep zooming, there's actually like 40 of these.
These are called geomes.
But wait, there's more.
If we keep going, actually what you're going to see is this.
Geomes are like this little piece of the API reference.
But there are a lot of other kinds of things, like facets, scales, and positions.
Obviously, these went into the plot that you're trying to create.
But this would be a really tough place, I think, to start.
You would just be waiting around for a long time, super confused.
But what if you saw a simple example instead?
So what if you saw a really simple plot that used some key pieces of Plot9?
For example, what if it used facet wrap to create subplots?
This helps sort of set up a sense for how Plot9 puts things together.
And it could mention that it's using geome smooth and geome point to actually put things on the plot.
So geome smooth puts that blue line in each of these subplots.
And geome point puts the points there.
And we could point out that scale color continuous is what makes this color bar from, say, blue to yellow.
So I think this is really helpful because this is a sort of minimal example
that gives you a sense for how some of the pieces of Plot9 fit together.
So you can navigate things like the API reference to do what you want.
I also wonder what if you saw the big pieces.
So rather than this API reference, squint your eyes, I mean, it's all there.
What if you saw something like this?
This is, I think, like 16 pages that just summarize the big pieces of Plot9
and help you get a sense for how all of it fits together.
I think these are really important jobs.
And I think these are essentially what a user guide does.
So I would say a user guide is concrete and sort of right sized for getting into a tool.
And user guides are all over.
So you might know them by a lot of names.
So in FastAPI, it's the learn button.
In Pollers, it's just called user guide.
We love that.
In Plot9, it's guide.
But all of these go to the same kind of thing.
I also think really interestingly, if you click this probably most prominent button,
it usually takes you to the user guide.
So user guides are really front and center in documentation.
They're probably the most prominent call to action that documentation sites give.
So it's really important to get it right.
And my hope in this talk is to lay out the two key pieces to focus on for getting a user guide right.
So the first one I'll talk about is onboarding.
So, for example, we showed what I call like a simplest whole task with Plot9.
What's the sort of simplest whole plot we could show someone that's exciting
but also easy to break apart so they can get started with the pieces.
And I'd say I'll go through some other examples to kind of like flesh out the onboarding story with FastAPI
and a resource called R for Data Science.
But jumping to the second piece, I would say it's sort of like grazing.
And in this talk, I'll use a sidebar as an example for grazing.
But once you get through the simplest whole task,
how do you then sort of keep going through a library from beginning to end?
And how do you do something that gets you through prerequisites
but then lets you come back as you take on different tasks to find the sort of big pieces you need?
And again, I'll hit on a FastAPI and R for Data Science example
to try to flesh out different focuses for sidebars and grazing
that I'll say is one's frontloading and the other I'll call backwards chaining.
All right.
So I'm going to start.
I'm going to go down the line with Plot9, the FastAPI, the R for Data Science
to try to highlight key focuses for onboarding and grazing.
All right.
So starting with Plot9, I really want to focus on this idea of this simplest whole task
and having a good hierarchy to your user guide.
All right.
So we looked already at this plot.
I'm going to show the Plot9 overview page,
so sort of the starting page of the user guide
and how it sort of carves up this simplest whole task.
So to start, it shows you the plot that you'll be making
so you know sort of what you're getting into
and hopefully it's like something interesting to you
that actually shows off why you might use Plot9.
I think this table of contents, this floating table of contents,
helps show some of the structure that there are, say, three
I need to stop pointing with my hand because I think
I don't know if people can see it everywhere,
but there are sort of like seven big categories that the overview will emphasize.
And interestingly, in Plot9, each category is sort of a grouping of functions
that starts with, is prefixed with the category.
So geom functions start with the word geom.
OK.
So basically, to give you a sense for the overview, what happens is
each of these categories is previewed quickly
and each of these is just a little bit of text.
So a couple sentences followed by a little code
and then the output of the code.
So people can see, they saw the original plot they'll be making
and then they can see it being built step by step.
This is called a worked example.
You're showing, you're sort of working through the process.
You're not necessarily asking people to do things,
but you're working it out and you're pointing their attention
at things they should care about in these outputs.
All right.
So these are the sort of quick explanations in the initial overview
so people can see how these seven pieces fit together
and do different pieces of plot nine.
The next thing I want to point out is that,
so zooming out, this is the sidebar.
So these are the sort of like chapters in the plot nine guide.
And basically how it works is that the pieces that were talked about
in the overview are then,
plot nine goes on to dive deeper into each one
in a subsequent page or chapter.
So you can see this thing called AAS,
this isn't short for aesthetic mapping,
is then covered in detail.
And I'll call this a detail spiral.
So basically the overview page covers in brief each of these things
and then a subsequent section, basics,
goes into detail on each of these pieces in depth.
This lets people get a broad sense for how to use your tool on a real task
before diving deeper into each piece.
I think this also helps with prerequisites
because this means, you know,
a lot of these pieces don't just work in isolation,
they depend on each other a little bit.
So by covering all of them,
you get some of the prerequisites out of the way.
And this is just showing the detail spiral in a different way.
So this is diagramming where people go through these concepts.
So in the overview they do a broad pass over everything
and then they loop back and you sort of hit each one.
So just a quick diagrammatic representation.
For the sidebar I'd say the value is sort of going from
things that focus more on prerequisites,
things you need to know to get started,
to more grazeable,
so things that you can sort of sample as you go.
Once you get to about geometric objects,
after this chapter,
you can sort of like click around quite a bit.
And so the hope is that the titles and these sections
make it easy for people to see
different sort of categories of things they might do
and quickly key into different activities.
All right.
And just to show you by contrast,
so this is without the sections.
It's actually, I find it pretty hard to read
without this breaking apart into sections.
And I see this a lot in guides
where you just have like 20 things
and I find it incredibly overwhelming.
So just a little bit of structure I think
helps people navigate a user guide.
It also puts names on activities
which makes it easier to talk about.
All right.
So just to summarize,
plot nine for onboarding,
we talked a little bit about using a simplest whole task
to get people onboarded and familiar with key concepts
and then structuring your sidebar or chapters
so they're easy to graze
and easy to see how things are grouped.
All right.
So next I'm gonna look quickly at FastAPI
which is a really interesting tool
I think with a really nice approach to user guides.
So the way FastAPI works is
FastAPI is a tool for building,
it's a web framework
so you can deploy web applications
like this one shown in the browser.
The tricky thing is that for a web application
is often there's something in the middle.
So usually the process is
you might write some FastAPI code
and then there's this middle piece called a web server
which is not necessarily FastAPI
and then you interact with it in the web browser.
So there's actually a lot of context
in which you're interacting with different things.
You might be in an IDE writing code.
You might be using this something like,
actually I've never said this word out loud,
GUnicorn, is that?
GUnicorn?
Well, I mean, one of those two is right
to serve it
and then you might pop open your web browser
to interact with it.
So FastAPI has a hard problem
because you could be in three different contexts
when you're using FastAPI.
The way they handle this
is that they give you a simplest whole task
which is essentially like doing this
as fast as possible.
So they just hand you the code
and they say copy this into a file
and then they just give you this special command
FastAPI dev
which runs the web application.
So essentially they try to lift you past these pieces
so that you can get into the web browser
as fast as possible.
And this is a real risk
that I see sometimes with these tools
is some tools instead will tell you
about the middle thing in depth
and how you can use it
or they're actually like,
probably like five different web servers you can use
and some things take the chance
to kind of tell you about each one
but I think FastAPI does a good job
of just actually telling you about none of them
and getting you to the kind of end product.
You'll have time later to learn about the middle part
but FastAPI wants you to know what it does well for you.
So this is showing a bit of what FastAPI did there.
So they gave you task support.
They just handed you the code.
They just handed you this special command
and they got you to pop open a web browser.
That's actually a ton of work.
I think that FastAPI got you super far
and I think if you're new to programming
or new to web applications
they got you through a ton of stuff really fast.
I think the interesting thing is the next piece they do
is they start to work backwards.
So rather than diving into the code
they say, well you've already got the web browser open
so why don't we just tell you about what we're giving you
and they explain special FastAPI features
like their automatic documentation.
So I think this is really neat.
They've basically lifted you to the end product
and they're explaining to you what it does.
Then they loop back and explain the code in detail
after they've sort of gotten you to appreciate the end thing
and understand what an end goal looks like.
The other interesting thing is their sidebar structure looks like this.
This is a bit in the weeds
but they talk a lot about concepts
but rather than...
Plot 9 basically went in order like
this is thing A, this is thing B, this is thing C.
FastAPI does an interesting thing
they automate through topics.
So they start with path parameters, query parameters, request body.
These are kind of like the initial prerequisites
but then they start looping back
to things they think you'll want to use first.
So they don't do all the path stuff in depth.
They then loop back to querying.
And I think the way that they maintain a sense of structure
about FastAPI is they front load all the titles.
So notice that path starts chapters 2 and 6.
Notice query starts 3, 5, and 7.
They sort of use this to flag to you
hey, we're alternating through these things
but these are like the three big things we care about.
Yeah, I added the colors so I cheated.
My hope is like when you stare at it long enough
it starts to make sense.
But yeah, I added it just so people could see it quick
because this is a talk and we don't have time
to really marinate in it.
The other thing is they back load subtopics.
So notice like these two chapters are about
these main topics and then validation.
So they're sort of weaving it together
and I think they're really cleverly using front loading and back loading
to try to flag the structure to you.
And because you asked that great question
here's the sidebar without coloring.
Obviously as a cognitive psychologist
I want to acknowledge that I cheated
and I showed you colored things.
So I've primed you to see it.
Coloring?
I think you should submit it.
We'll figure it out.
So this is without color.
And the thing I want to flag is that
without front loading like if you
were to kind of like put something before
the front loaded topics
I think that it could really
make it hard to see
the kind of key topics.
So this is like
one of the challenges with giving titles.
But I think that front loading here
really helps you see the structure of FastAPI.
And without something to
distinguish
you could really run into the case
where everything starts to kind of run together.
So Plot 9 used sections.
FastAPI used front loading.
But you want something to make it clear.
All right.
So we talked a little bit about
for onboarding FastAPI provides
code and command line support.
For grazing it uses front loading
to try to emphasize its structure to you.
Now we're going to look at R for Data Science.
Which is a bit funny as a user guide.
It's a book that's like hundreds of thousands of words.
But I think it's a good example
of what is essentially a really large document.
So
just for a little background
R for Data Science is a book about
using R for Data Science.
And it centers on this diagram
of this data science workflow or life cycle.
Where you start by importing
or reading some data like a CSV in.
You tidy it up.
Maybe you fix the column names
or you reshape it a bit
as part of the tidying process.
You then engage this cycle of
transforming, visualizing, and modeling your data
so you can understand it.
And when you come to something really nice
that you want to send your boss or journal
you then communicate it.
So this is the cycle of understanding.
And the book is really structured around
this life cycle.
And here's the structure of the book.
So this is the introduction.
And this is the chapter organization.
And the thing I really want to flag here is that
first it's got this whole game section
designed to teach you about the life cycle.
And it starts with visualize.
So it actually doesn't start you from the beginning.
I think what's notable is that
it can't do like a single chapter overview.
It needs to break this up because it's pretty big.
And it starts with visualize.
And I think the real reason is
visualization's really satisfying.
And it's also pretty close to like
seeing an end product.
And then notice it keeps going backwards.
So then it goes back to transform.
Back to tidying. Back to import.
So this is its way of handling a really big job
by breaking it up and chaining backwards
from the most satisfying or
a very like kind of end goal piece
to the beginning piece.
And then notice the later sections
actually follow this as well.
So the first section after this whole game onboarding
is visualizing followed by transform.
So it's going backwards again
to try to kind of optimize for joy, I think.
Another interesting thing is that it
kind of peppers in these prerequisites.
So these are often like coding knowledge you need
for the book.
But it doesn't want to just front load
all the coding pieces because
you would hate your life and you wouldn't be learning
R for data science.
It works them in right before the point that you need it.
So this is the spiral shown another way.
I think this is a really neat way
to tackle a really big problem
by carving it up and working backwards.
And just to emphasize,
I think this is the door
because it's the most satisfying
and it's close to an end product.
All right.
So, yeah, we talked a little bit about onboarding.
We talked about plot nine to use a simple whole task.
Fast API to support people to the end goal.
And R for data science to backwards chain
and teach the most satisfying thing.
First, we also looked at grazing
where you break up your sidebar
to create an information hierarchy
so people can see the parts
and it doesn't all blend together.
How you can also front load
to emphasize the structure.
Or like R for data science,
if you have a really big job,
you can backwards chain
and start with the end thing
and work backwards.
I think these are really important, powerful moves
because tools are complicated
and it's really hard to learn a new tool.
And people need all the help they can get
both to get started
and to come back
as they need things to handle new tasks.
So I think the more we can do to bring people in
but also provide a structure
that makes really clear
how our tool fits the way we want them to think,
the better people will be at using our docs
through the sort of whole life cycle
of the tasks they're trying to do.
So thanks a lot for listening.
And I'm sorry I was checking the time.
I'm so excited for your questions.
Applause
First question is from Kayla.
What thoughts do you have on tools
to automatically generate doc strings
and documentation?
Good, bad?
Such a good question.
Well, what if I told you I myself
was the maintainer of a tool
to generate API references?
I think that...
Okay, this is what I would say.
I actually had this as a starting thing.
So I maintain a tool to generate API references.
Things like this.
So like each of your classes,
each of your methods.
And I would say like
people always ask me about the API reference
which makes sense because I maintain the tool to build it.
But I always think about this.
The tool itself,
actually I've spent more time on the user guide
than the API reference.
Like I think that engineers
always go API reference first.
Like I've never seen an engineer
not do API reference first.
And my story is like
you should user guide first.
Like you can write doc strings
but you should just pretend they don't exist
until you have a user guide.
And that's what I like about FastAPI.
They actually had a user guide
before an API reference.
I just think it's a really good forcing function
for thinking about the story you want to tell
rather than how each individual piece works.
But I think they're cool.
I think they're obviously really important.
Thanks.
Peter asks,
do you see the role or format of user guides changing
when many people's new default way of learning about a package
will be to ask an AI chatbot about the package?
Yeah, it's a good question.
I mean,
I don't...
It's such a good question.
I have no idea.
I think...
My guess though is that
there's so much low hanging fruit
in terms of writing user guides
and documentation in general
that we're not really at the point I think of...
There's so much on the table right now
that you could do, I think,
to improve user guides
that it's probably okay to assume that
your improvements to user guides
will also be picked up by AI
either as context
or as part of training.
And I think also
it's a good way to just sharpen your thinking.
Like a big piece of,
I think a user guide and documentation
is having a controlled vocabulary.
So I think like having to work out
like what are the sections
is also a good way to ensure
that you're using sort of systematic language
and categories.
And I suspect that
AI will heartily take advantage of that
because it will have like consistent words
and categories to use.
So Charles asks,
is the spiral about trying to keep readers
in the zone of proximal development?
Yeah.
Yeah, I think so.
Like essentially...
Yeah, you're like
bringing down the difficulty by
kind of like building their skill
in the things they need.
Yeah.
Okay.
Lauren was wondering,
is it useful to have a user guide
be part of a repo
to facilitate contributions
from the point of view of users
instead of authors?
Is that common?
Oh, like
you said user guide like in its own repo.
Yes.
What a great question.
I actually have a user guide.
So the plot nine guide,
I own the repo.
So I don't know if this counts,
but
the reason I did this was
maybe for that reason,
as I said, like,
this is such a big job.
This is basically like
as if you had like a dependency on plot nine
or you were like
a tool to explain plot nine,
like that.
I just asked plot nine's author,
Hassan,
to just like delegate to me the job
of running the guide.
And I don't know if that's the exact question,
but I think relatedly like
I was like,
I need to be fully immersed
in this task
because
it's
a job just as important as
writing the plot nine code.
So I think that
yeah, I think
I think it's helpful
and it's an activity that should be
seen as just as big
and challenging.
Yeah.
Thanks.
Max has a question.
Aside from doc strings,
auto-generated API guides,
how do you ensure that docs are up-to-date
with the code
and a continuous integration cycle?
I feel like
when I see user guides
that could use sprucing up,
like I,
well, okay.
So one,
Cordo's really useful.
So like
for the tool, great tables,
we use Cordo
and
I'm biased.
Cordo's developed by Posit.
So
take that with
a grain of salt.
But
like we do a lot of
code in our documentation
here
and these are really simple like
markdown
that gets executed.
So like
our docs get
regenerated each time
and it's just executing the code.
So I think
yeah.
And we get,
we also get really sad
because maybe we do like a code thing
and
our docs don't generate
and then we can't merge it.
But that's like the right,
I feel like that's the right level of sadness.
You know, we like feel it.
But yeah.
So it's just using this like little markdown
syntax.
Oh, that's bad.
So
and it gets executed every time
on our CI.
So I think things like that are useful.
Yeah.
I think that
probably helps.
And as our last question from Tim,
as you mentioned,
quality user guides require considerable time investment.
How do you balance this time
or even keep track
as API and best practices evolve
and even
your
end users goals evolve?
How do you identify what is the core of a library
that needs to be learned and shared?
It's a really good,
yeah, it's a really good question.
I mean,
I mean, I'm thinking of R4DS,
like R4DS is all about an activity
and
it's like hundreds of thousands of words.
So it's a bet that
that
activity is worth talking about.
I think it's fair like
the fear that
your user guide will need to change
is sort of like
the fear that you've
targeted the wrong audience
or built the wrong
thing.
But
it's kind of a product question.
I would say like
you want to really
make sure you've built the right
thing.
And I think that
a user guide,
I think the thing a user guide would give you
is
the chance to like
run people through the core idea
of your tool
and to look
them in the eyes and see if they're like
they look dead inside
while they do it.
That's my litmus test
is I'm like
try doing this thing
and I watch them like skip parts of the guide
or like
die inside
and I think
it's a really great opportunity.
You should see people die inside
as you build your tool.
I think
it's a
it's a soul
enriching
activity.